---
title: Create a Project
---

To create a program we need to write source code, and to write source code we need somewhere to put it. 
While this process may differ slightly between languages, the idea is always the same: gather the code in one place and provide any settings needed.

At this stage, you will be using the C# language, which is part of the open-source [.NET framework](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/) produced by Microsoft. These tools are free, work cross-platform, and provide us with a great language that we can use to explore programming.

:::note
You need somewhere to save your projects. In this book, we will assume you are saving things in your **~/Documents/Code** folder. If you are saving your code elsewhere then make sure to adjust paths as needed.

If you haven't created a **Code** folder in your documents, then you will need to do this first.
Review the `mkdir` command from [manipulating files](../../../2-computer-use/1-concepts/05-manipulating-files/#making-a-directory-mkdir) to do this using the shell.
:::

## Using `dotnet`

First, let's see how to use the `dotnet` command line tool to create a project.
Try the following commands in the terminal to create a new "HelloWorld" project:

```sh
cd ~/Documents/Code
mkdir HelloWorld
cd HelloWorld
dotnet new console
ls -lha
```

This starts by moving the shell into your **~/Documents/Code** folder and creating a new **HelloWorld** folder.
We can then use this folder to store all the files that will be related to this project.

The `dotnet` program sets up a C# project using the dotnet framework.
It will do many things for us.
The `new` argument indicates we want a new project, and `console` indicates the type of program.
In this context, "console" is a synonym for the terminal, and tells the `dotnet` tool we would like to write a program that is connected to the terminal with the [standard streams](../../../2-computer-use/1-concepts/07-streams/) for input, output, and error messages.

:::tip
The key thing to remember from this is the command **`dotnet new console`**.
:::

Once you run the command `ls -lha`, you should see output something like this:

```sh
total 16
drwxr-xr-x   6 multitool  dev   192B 16 Aug 21:24 .
drwxr-xr-x  91 multitool  dev   2.8K 15 Aug 21:31 ..
drwxr-xr-x   5 multitool  dev   160B 15 Aug 21:32 .vscode
-rw-r--r--   1 multitool  dev   105B 16 Aug 21:24 Program.cs
drwxr-xr-x   7 multitool  dev   224B 16 Aug 21:24 obj
-rw-r--r--   1 multitool  dev   249B 16 Aug 21:24 HelloWorld.csproj
```

Except for **.** and **..**, which are the [current and parent](../../../2-computer-use/1-concepts/04-files-shell/#relative-paths) folders of this folder, all of these files and folders were generated by `dotnet` to help you:

* **.vscode** is a folder to hold settings for the Visual Studio Code editor we are going to use, which is also produced by Microsoft and designed to work with `dotnet`. You may not see this folder until you open the project in Visual Studio Code for the first time, which we will do soon.
* **Program.cs** is the initial source code file for the project, which we will look at in the next section.
* **obj** is a folder for storing temporary files related to building your program. If you run `ls obj/` you will see that there are already some files in this folder -- feel free to use `cat` to explore what they contain.
* **HelloWorld.csproj** is a file containing settings for the project. You can view these settings by running `cat HelloWorld.csproj`.

You now have everything you need to get started writing some code.
